.TH "VMM.CFG" "5" "2011-11-06" "vmm 0.6" "vmm"
.SH NAME
vmm.cfg \- configuration file for vmm
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
vmm.cfg
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR vmm (1)
reads its configuration data from
.IR vmm.cfg .
.PP
The configuration file is split into multiple sections.
A section starts with the section name, enclosed in square brackets
.RB ` [ "' and `" ] ',
followed by
.RI ` option " = " value '
pairs.
.br
Whitespace around the `=' and at the end of a value is ignored.
Empty lines and lines starting with `#' or `;' will be ignored.
.PP
Each value uses one of the following data types:
.TP 8
.I Boolean
to indicate if something is enabled/activated (true) or
disabled/deactivated (false).
.br
Accepted values for
.I true
are:
.BR 1 , " yes" , " true" " and " on .
.br
Accepted values for
.I false
are:
.BR 0 , " no" , " false" " and " off .
.TP
.I Int
an integer number, written without a fractional or decimal component.
.br
For example
.BR 1 , " 50" " or " 321
are integers.
.TP
.I String
a sequence of characters and/or numbers.
.br
For example
.RB ` word "', `" "hello world" "' or `" /usr/bin/strings '
are strings.
.PP
Most options have a default value, shown in parentheses after the option's
name.
In order to use a option's default setting, comment out the line, either
with a
.BR # " or " ;
or simply remove the setting from
.IR vmm.cfg .
.PP
A minimal
.I vmm.cfg
would be:
.PP
.nf
[database]
user = me
pass = xxxxxxxx

[misc]
dovecot_version = 1.2.16
.fi
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SEARCH ORDER
By default
.BR vmm (1)
looks for the
.I vmm.cfg
file in the following directories in the order listed:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.I
/root
.TP
.I
/usr/local/etc
.TP
.I
/etc
.PD
.RE
.PP
The first configuration file found will be used.
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION ACCOUNT
The options in the section
.B account
are used to specify user account related settings.
.SS account.delete_directory
.BR delete_directory " (default: false) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines the behavior of
.BR vmm (1)
when an account is deleted (userdelete).
If this option is set to
.I true
the user's home directory will be deleted recursively.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS account.directory_mode
.BR directory_mode " (default: 448) :"
.I Int
.PP
Access mode for a user's home directory and all directories inside.
The value has to be specified in decimal (base 10) notation.
.br
For example: `drwx\-\-\-\-\-\-' \(-> octal 0700 \(-> decimal 448
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS account.disk_usage
.BR disk_usage " (default: false) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether the disk usage of a user's mail directory always should
be summarized, using
.BR du (1),
and displayed with the account information (userinfo).
.PP
This could be slow on large Maildirs.
When you have enabled quotas,
.BR vmm 's
userinfo subcommand will also display the current quota usage of the
account.
You may also use userinfo's optional details\-argument
.BR du " or " full ,
in order to display the current disk usage of an account's mail directory.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS account.password_length
.BR password_length " (default: 8) :"
.I Int
.PP
Determines how many characters and/or numbers should be used for randomly
generated passwords.
Any value less than 8 will be increased to 8.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS account.random_password
.BR random_password " (default: false) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether
.BR vmm (1)
should generate a random password when no password was given for the
useradd subcommand.
If this option is set to
.I false
.B vmm
will prompt you to enter a password for the new account.
.PP
You can specify the password length of generated passwords with the
.I account.password_length
option.
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION BIN
The
.B bin
section is used to specify some paths to some binaries required by
.BR vmm (1).
.SS bin.dovecotpw
.BR dovecotpw " (default: /usr/sbin/dovecotpw) :"
.I String
.PP
The absolute path to the
.BR dovecotpw (1)
binary.
Use the absolute path to the
.BR doveadm (1)
binary, if you are using Dovecot v2.0.
.PP
This binary is used to generate a password hash, if
.I misc.password_scheme
is set to one of `CRAM\-MD5', `HMAC\-MD5', `LANMAN', `OTP', `RPA' or
`SKEY'.
This binary will be also required if your Python installation doesn't
support the:
.IP \(bu 4
md4 hash algorithm (hashlib + OpenSSL or PyCrypto) used for the password
schemes: `PLAIN\-MD4' and `NTLM'
.IP \(bu
sha256 hash algorithm (hashlib or PyCrypto \(>= 2.1.0alpha1) used for the
password schemes: `SHA256' and `SSHA256'
.IP \(bu
sha512 hash algorithm (hashlib) used for the password schemes: `SHA512' and
`SSHA512'
.PP
The
.BR doveadm (1)
binary is also used to create a user's INBOX and additional mailboxes
.RI ( mailbox.folders ),
when the
.I mailbox.format
is set to
.BR mdbox " or " sdbox .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS bin.du
.BR du " (default: /usr/bin/du) :"
.I String
.PP
The absolute path to
.BR du (1).
This binary is used to summarize the disk usage of a user's mail directory.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS bin.postconf
.BR postconf " (default: /usr/sbin/postconf) :"
.I String
.PP
The absolute path to Postfix'
.BR postconf (1).
This binary is required when
.BR vmm (1)
has to check for some Postfix settings, e.g. the
.IR virtual_alias_expansion_limit .
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION DATABASE
The
.B database
section is used to specify some options required to connect to the
database.
.SS database.host
.BR host " (default: localhost) :"
.I String
.PP
Hostname or IP address of the database server.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.module
.BR module " (default: psycopg2) :"
.I String
.PP
The Python PostgreSQL database adapter module to be used.
Supported modules are
.BR psycopg2 " and " pyPgSQL .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.name
.BR name " (default: mailsys) :"
.I String
.PP
Name of the database.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.pass
.BR pass " (default: " None ") :"
.I String
.PP
Database password.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.port
.BR port " (default: 5432) :"
.I Int
.PP
The TCP port, on which the database server is listening for connections.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.sslmode
.BR sslmode " (default: prefer) :"
.I String
.PP
Determines whether and with what priority an SSL connection will be
negotiated with the database server.
Possible values are:
.BR disabled ", " allow ", " prefer ", " require ", " verify\-ca " and "
.BR verify\-full .
The modes
.BR verify\-ca " and " verify\-full
are available since PostgreSQL 8.4
.PP
This setting will be ignored when the
.I database.module
is set to
.BR pyPgSQL .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS database.user
.BR user " (default: " None ") :"
.I String
.PP
Name of the database user.
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION DOMAIN
The
.B domain
section specifies some domain related settings.
.PP
The quota limit (quota_bytes and quota_messages), service settings (imap,
pop3, sieve and smtp) and the transport setting will be applied when a
domain is created.
In order to modify those settings for an existing domain, use one of
the following
.BR vmm (1)
subcommands:
.PP
.TP
.B domainquota
in order to update a domain's quota limit
.TP
.B domainservices
in order to assign a different service set to a domain
.TP
.B domaintransport
in order to set a new default domain transport
.PP
When an account is created, it inherits all the settings of the domain
to which it is added.
Different settings for an existing account can be set using the subcommands
.BR userquota ", " userservices " and " usertransport .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.auto_postmaster
.BR auto_postmaster " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines if
.BR vmm (1)
should create also a postmaster account when a new domain is created
(domainadd).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.delete_directory
.BR delete_directory " (default: false) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Specifies whether the domain directory and all user directories inside
should be deleted when a domain is deleted (domaindelete).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.directory_mode
.BR directory_mode " (default: 504) :"
.I Int
.PP
Access mode for the domain directory in decimal (base 10) notation.
.br
For example: `drwxrwx\-\-\-' \(-> octal 0770 \(-> decimal 504
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.force_deletion
.BR force_deletion " (default: false) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Force the deletion of accounts and aliases when a domain is deleted
(domaindelete).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.imap
.BR imap " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether newly created users can log in via IMAP.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.pop3
.BR pop3 " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether newly created users can log in via POP3.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.quota_bytes
.BR quota_bytes " (default: 0) :"
.I String
.PP
Quota limit in bytes.
0 means unlimited.
This limit will be applied to all newly created domains.
.PP
The option's value can be written as an integer value, e.g.:
.BR 20480 .
It's also possible to append one of the following prefixes to the limit:
.BR b " (bytes), " k " (kilobytes), " M " (megabytes) or " G
(gigabytes).
.br
1024 is the same as 1024b or 1k.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.quota_messages
.BR quota_messages " (default: 0) :"
.I Int
.PP
Quota limit in number of messages.
0 means unlimited.
This limit will be applied to all newly created domains.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.sieve
.BR sieve " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether newly created users can log in via SIEVE (ManageSieve).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.smtp
.BR smtp " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
Determines whether newly created users can log in via SMTP (SMTP AUTH).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS domain.transport
.BR transport " (default: dovecot:) :"
.I String
.PP
Default transport for domains and accounts.
For details see
.BR transport (5).
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION MAILBOX
The
.B mailbox
section is used to specify some options for new created mailboxes in the
users home directories.
The INBOX will be created always.
.SS mailbox.folders
.BR folders " (default: Drafts:Sent:Templates:Trash) :"
.I String
.PP
A colon separated list of mailboxes that should be created.
If no additionally mailboxes should be created, set the value of this
option to a single colon
.RB (` : ').
.PP
If you want to create folders containing one or more subfolders, separate
them with a single dot
.RB (` . ').
.PP
If you want to use internationalized mailbox names (e.g. `Wysłane' or
`Gelöschte Objekte'), write their names UTF\-8 encoded.
.BR vmm (1)
will convert internationalized mailbox names to a modified version of the
UTF\-7 encoding (see also: RFC 3501, section 5.1.3).
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS mailbox.format
.BR format " (default: maildir) :"
.I String
.PP
The mailbox format to be used for a user's mailbox.
Depending on the used Dovecot version
.RI ( misc.dovecot_version )
.BR vmm (1)
supports up to three formats:
.TP 8
.B maildir
Dovecot \(>= v1.0.0
.TP
.B mdbox
Dovecot \(>= v2.0.beta5
.TP
.B sdbox
Dovecot \(>= v2.0.rc3
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS mailbox.root
.BR root " (default: Maildir) :"
.I String
.PP
Name of the mailbox root directory in a user's home directory.
Commonly used names, depending on the used
.IR mailbox.format ,
are
.BR Maildir ", " mdbox " or " sdbox .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS mailbox.subscribe
.BR subscribe " (default: true) :"
.I Boolean
.PP
When this option is set to
.BR true ,
the mailboxes from the
.I mailbox.folders
option will be listed in the user's subscriptions file.
If you don't want to subscribe the created mailboxes, set this option to
.BR false .
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SECTION MISC
The
.I misc
section is used to define miscellaneous settings.
.SS misc.base_directory
.BR base_directory " (default: /srv/mail) :"
.I String
.PP
All domain directories will be created inside this directory.
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS misc.crypt_blowfish_rounds
.BR crypt_blowfish_rounds " (default: 5) :"
.I Int
.PP
Number of encryption rounds for the
.I password_scheme
.BR BLF\-CRYPT .
.PP
The value must be in range
.BR 4 " \- " 31 .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS misc.crypt_sha256_rounds
.BR crypt_sha256_rounds " (default: 5000) :"
.I Int
.PP
Number of encryption rounds for the
.I password_scheme
.BR SHA256\-CRYPT .
.PP
The value must be in range
.BR 1000 " \- " 999999999 .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS misc.crypt_sha512_rounds
.BR crypt_sha512_rounds " (default: 5000) :"
.I Int
.PP
Number of encryption rounds for the
.I password_scheme
.BR SHA512\-CRYPT .
.PP
The value must be in range
.BR 1000 " \- " 999999999 .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS misc.dovecot_version
.BR dovecot_version " (default: " None ") :"
.I String
.PP
The version number of the currently used Dovecot version.
(see:
.BR "dovecot \-\-version" )
.br
When, for example, the command
.B dovecot \-\-version
prints
.IR "2.0.beta4 (8818db00d347)" ,
set the value of this option to
.BR 2.0.beta4 .
.\" ------------------------------------
.SS misc.password_scheme
.BR password_scheme " (default: CRAM\-MD5) :"
.I String
.PP
Password scheme to use.
To get a list of all available password schemes execute the command
.B dovecotpw \-l
(Dovecot v1.x) or
.B doveadm pw \-l
(Dovecot v2.0).
.PP
With Dovecot \(>= v1.1.alpha1 it is also possible to append an encoding
suffix to the password_scheme.
Supported encoding suffixes are:
.BR .b64 ", " .base64 " and " .hex .
For example: PLAIN.BASE64
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLE
An example configuration.
All options that are not listed in the configuration file will have their
default values.
.PP
.nf
[account]
password_length = 10
random_password = true

[bin]
dovecotpw = /usr/bin/doveadm

[database]
host = dbsrv8.example.net
pass = PY_SRJ}L/0p\-oOk
port = 5433
sslmode = require
user = vmm

[domain]
quota_bytes = 500M
quota_messages = 10000
transport = lmtp:unix:private/dovecot\-lmtp

[mailbox]
folders = Drafts:Sent:Templates:Trash:Lists.Dovecot:Lists.Postfix

[misc]
crypt_sha512_rounds = 10000
dovecot_version = 2.0.beta4
password_scheme = SHA512\-CRYPT.hex
.fi
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR doveadm\-pw (1),
.BR dovecotpw (1),
.BR postconf (1),
.BR vmm (1),
.BR transport (5)
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH INTERNET RESOURCES
.TP
Wiki
http://vmm.localdomain.org/
.TP
Project site
http://sf.net/projects/vmm/
.TP
Bug tracker
http://sf.net/tracker/?group_id=213727&atid=1026862
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH COPYING
vmm and its manual pages were written by Pascal Volk <neverseen AT
users.sourceforge.net> and are licensed under the terms of the BSD License.