======================
Upgrading to vmm 0.6.x
======================
This document describes the procedure to upgrade a vmm-0.5.2 installation
to version 0.6.x

If you still have installed vmm-0.4/vmm-0.4-r41 you have to proceed this
step first:

 ‣ :doc:`0.4.x-0.5`

Upgrading from vmm-0.5.2
------------------------

Stop Postfix and Dovecot
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Before updating your database layout you have to stop Postfix and Dovecot.

.. code-block:: console

 root@host:~# /etc/init.d/postfix stop
 Stopping Postfix Mail Transport Agent: postfix.
 root@host:~# /etc/init.d/dovecot stop
 Stopping IMAP/POP3 mail server: dovecot.

Create a database backup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
It is always wise to back up your database from time to time.
Particularly with regard to an impending structure modification.


Example: Backing up the `mailsys` database with pg_dump_.

.. code-block:: console

 user@host:~$ pg_dump -h localhost -U vmm -W mailsys > mailsys-0.5.2.sql

Database update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Connect as your `vmm` database user to your database.

.. code-block:: console

 user@host:~$ psql mailsys vmm -W -h localhost

In the PostgreSQL interactive terminal you have to run one of the following
commands to perform the update.

Dovecot v1.2.x/v2.0.x/v2.1.x
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.. code-block:: postgresql-console

 mailsys=> \i /path/to/vmm-0.6.2/pgsql/update_tables_0.5.x-0.6-dovecot-1.2.x.pgsql
 mailsys=> \q

Dovecot v1.0.x/v1.1.x
"""""""""""""""""""""
.. code-block:: postgresql-console

 mailsys=> \i /path/to/vmm-0.6.2/pgsql/update_tables_0.5.x-0.6.pgsql
 mailsys=> \q

.. _set-database-permissions:

Set database permissions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. include:: ../pgsql_set_permissionspermissions.rst

Start Dovecot and Postfix again
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. warning:: All the views (*dovecot_…* and *postfix_…*) have been
   replaced by database functions.
   So you have to adjust all your ``postfix/pgsql-*.cf`` files and also your
   ``/etc/dovecot/dovecot-sql.conf`` or ``/etc/dovecot/dovecot-sql.conf.ext``.

   See the `vmm-0.6.2/postfix/pgsql-*.cf` files and
   :ref:`Dovecot configuration <dovecot-sql-conf-ext>`/`dovecot-sql.conf.ext`
   or :ref:`Dovecot configuration <dovecot-sql-conf>`/`dovecot-sql-conf`.

After a successfully update start Dovecot and Postfix again.

.. code-block:: console

 root@host:~# /etc/init.d/dovecot start
 Starting IMAP/POP3 mail server: dovecot.
 root@host:~# /etc/init.d/postfix start
 Starting Postfix Mail Transport Agent: postfix.

Upgrade vmm
^^^^^^^^^^^
Finally execute the :file:`upgrade.sh` script.
This will install the new code and also update your :file:`vmm.cfg`.

.. code-block:: console

 root@host:~# cd /path/to/vmm-0.6.2
 root@host:/path/to/vmm-0.6.2# ./upgrade.sh
 Please have a look at your configuration: /usr/local/etc/vmm.cfg
 This are your Modified/Renamed/New settings:
 R   account.delete_directory = false
 R   account.directory_mode = 448
 R   account.disk_usage = false
 R   domain.delete_directory = false
 R   domain.directory_mode = 504
 R   domain.force_deletion = false
 R   domain.imap = true
 R   domain.pop3 = true
 R   domain.sieve = true
 R   domain.smtp = true
 R   domain.transport = dovecot:
 R   mailbox.folders = Drafts:Sent:Templates:Trash
 R   mailbox.root = Maildir
 R   misc.base_directory = /srv/mail
 M   misc.dovecot_version = 2.1.7
 R   misc.dovecot_version = 2.1.7
 R   misc.password_scheme = PLAIN

 Removed section "config" with option "done" (obsolte)

 Removed option "gid_mail" from section "misc" (obsolte)


Upgrading from vmm-0.6.0
------------------------

Database fixes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Due to an error in :ref:`usertransport`'s argument parsing, it is possible
that some users' transport-ID points to the erroneous transport *domain*.
To fix that error in your database, execute the following SQL statement:

.. code-block:: psql

 UPDATE users SET tid = NULL
  WHERE tid = (SELECT tid FROM transport WHERE transport = 'domain');

If you are using Dovecot < v.1.2.0, you have to replace the database
function *dovecotpassword()*.
The *service_set.ssid* was selected unconditionally.
This may cause an empty result, which will make logins impossible.
To replace the function execute the following SQL statement:

.. code-block:: psql

 CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION dovecotpassword(
     IN localpart varchar, IN the_domain varchar) RETURNS SETOF dovecotpassword
 AS $$
     DECLARE
         record dovecotpassword;
         userid varchar(320) := localpart || '@' || the_domain;
     BEGIN
         FOR record IN
             SELECT userid, passwd, smtp, pop3, imap, managesieve
               FROM users, service_set, domain_data
              WHERE users.gid = (SELECT gid
                                   FROM domain_name
                                  WHERE domainname = the_domain)
                AND local_part = localpart
                AND users.gid = domain_data.gid
                AND CASE WHEN
                   users.ssid IS NOT NULL
                   THEN
                     service_set.ssid = users.ssid
                   ELSE
                     service_set.ssid = domain_data.ssid
                   END
             LOOP
                 RETURN NEXT record;
             END LOOP;
         RETURN;
     END;
 $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql STABLE
 RETURNS NULL ON NULL INPUT
 EXTERNAL SECURITY INVOKER;

Upgrade vmm
^^^^^^^^^^^
Execute the :file:`upgrade.sh`, in order to install the updated code.

Upgrading from vmm-0.6.1
------------------------
If you have already installed vmm-6.0.1, simply execute the
:file:`upgrade.sh` script.

Upgrade to Dovecot ≧ v1.2.beta2
-------------------------------
When you are upgrading your old Dovecot (< v.1.2.beta2) to a newer version,
≧ v1.2.beta2, you also have to update the database layout.
After you have backed up your database, you have to apply the changes from
the file :file:`dovecot_update_v1.2+.pgsql` to your database.
(The file is currently only available from hg:
`dovecot_update_v1.2+.pgsql <http://hg.localdomain.org/vmm/raw-file/bb23693e5fc9/pgsql/dovecot_update_v1.2%2B.pgsql>`_)

Connect as your `vmm` database user to your database.

.. code-block:: console

 user@host:~$ psql mailsys vmm -W -h localhost

Then do the database update:

.. code-block:: postgresql-console

 mailsys=> \i /path/to/dovecot_update_v1.2+.pgsql
 mailsys=> \q

Finally :ref:`set-database-permissions`.

.. include:: ../ext_references.rst
